---
layout: post
title:  "First-Class Statistical Missing Values Support in Julia 0.7"
author: <a href="http://bouchet-valat.site.ined.fr">Milan Bouchet-Valat</a>
---

The 0.7 release of Julia will soon introduce first-class support for statistical
missing values. Being essential for statistical analyses and data management,
this feature is common among specialized languages, such as
[SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_(SQL)) (with the `NULL` value),
[R](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-lang.html#NA-handling) (`NA`),
[SAS](https://support.sas.com/documentation/cdl/en/lrcon/62955/HTML/default/viewer.htm#a001292604.htm)
(`.`, `' '`, etc.) or
[Stata](https://www.stata.com/support/faqs/data-management/logical-expressions-and-missing-values/)
(`.`, etc.). It is however quite rare among general-purpose languages, where
[`Nullable`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nullable_type) or
[`Option`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type) types generally do not allow
implicit propagation of null values (they require
[lifting](https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/ericlippert/2007/06/27/what-exactly-does-lifted-mean/))
and do not provide an efficient representation of arrays with missing values[^nullable].

[^nullable]: [C#](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/nullable-types/using-nullable-types)
(with `null`) and [VB.NET](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/visual-basic/programming-guide/language-features/data-types/nullable-value-types)
(with `Nothing`) are two partial exceptions to this rule, since they provide
*lifted* operators which operate on `Nullable` arguments and return `Nullable`s.

Drawing from the experience of existing languages, the design of missing values
in Julia 0.7 closely follows that of SQL's `NULL` and R's `NA`, which can be considered
as the most consistent implementations with regard to the support of missing values.
Incidentally, this makes it easy to generate SQL requests from Julia code or to have
R and Julia interoperate.

## From `NA` and `Nullable` to `missing`

Julia 0.7 will introduce a new `missing` object used to represent statistical
missing values. Resulting from intense design discussions, experimentations and language
improvements developed over several years, it is the heir of the `NA` value
implemented in the [DataArrays](https://github.com/JuliaStats/DataArrays.jl)
package, which used to be the standard way of representing missing data in Julia.
`missing` is actually very similar to its predecessor `NA`, but it benefits from many
improvements in the Julia compiler and language which make it fast, making it possible
to allow drop the `DataArray` type and using the standard `Array` type instead[^PDA].

[^PDA]: The `PooledDataArray` type shipped in the same package can be replaced with
either [`CategoricalArray`](https://github.com/JuliaData/CategoricalArrays.jl) or
[`PooledArray`](https://github.com/JuliaComputing/PooledArrays.jl) depending on whether
the data is really categorical or simply contains a small number of distinct values.

This framework is used by
[version 0.11](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/dataframes-0-11-released/7296/)
of the [DataFrames](https://github.com/JuliaStats/DataFrames.jl/) package,
which already works on Julia 0.6, even if performance improvements
will only become available with Julia 0.7.

The new `Missing` type also replaces the `Nullable` type introduced in Julia 0.4,
which turned out not to be the best choice to represent missing values[^jmw]. `Nullable`
suffered from several issues:

[^jmw]: In [a 2014 blog post](http://www.johnmyleswhite.com/notebook/2014/11/29/whats-wrong-with-statistics-in-julia/),
John Myles White advocated the use of `Nullable` due to its much higher performance
compared with`Union{T,NA}`. This performance gap no longer exists thanks to compiler
improvements which have been a game-changer for missing values support.

- It was used to represent two very different kinds of missingness, that we
  sometimes call respectively the "software engineer's null" and the "data
  scientist's null". The former refers to what `Nullable` is generally used for
  in most languages, i.e. `null` denotes the absence of a value, and one of the
  advantages of the `Nullable` type is to force developers to handle explicitly
  the case when there is no value. The latter refers to statistical missing values,
  which generally *propagate* silently in specialized languages, which is essential
  for convenience. It has become increasingly clear that these two uses conflict
  (even if specialized syntax could have helped mitigating this).

- To ensure type-stability, the `T` type parameter of `Nullable{T}` had to be
  specified whether a value was present or not. Finding out the appropriate type
  in the absence of any value (dubbed the "counterfactual return type") has
  turned out to be problematic in many cases, where code had to rely heavily
  on explicit calls to type inference, which would better be handled directly
  by the compiler.

- `Array{Nullable{T}}` objects used a sub-optimal memory layout where `T` values
  and the associated `Bool` indicator were stored side-by-side, which wastes
  space due to aligment constraints and is not the most efficient for processing.
  Therefore, specialized array types like
  [`NullableArray`](https://github.com/JuliaStats/NullableArrays.jl) had to be used
  (similar to `DataArray`).

For all these reasons, `Nullable`
[no longer exists](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/23642)
in Julia 0.7. Several replacements are provided, depending on the use case:

- Data which can contain statistical missing values should be represented as
  `Union{Missing,T}`, i.e. either a value of type `T` or the `missing` object.

- Situations where there may be a value of type `T` or no value should use
  `Union{Nothing,T}` (equivalent to `Union{Void,T}` on Julia 0.6). As a special case,
  if `nothing` is a possible value (i.e. `Nothing <: T`), `Union{Nothing,Some{T}}`
  should be used instead. This pattern is used by e.g. `findfirst` and `tryparse`.

This blog post covers the first case, and should hopefully make it clear why
it is useful to distinguish `missing` and `nothing`. To give a first insight, let
us note that the main difference between these two objects is that `missing`
generally propagates when passed to standard mathematical operators and functions,
while `nothing` does not implement any specific method and therefore generally
gives a `MethodError`.

The rest of the post illustrates the expression "first class support" used
in the title by presenting three properties of the Julia 0.7 implementation of
statistical missing values:

1. The `missing` object can be used in combination with any type, be it defined in
   Base, in a package or in user code.

2. Standard Julia code working with missing values is efficient, without special tricks.

3. Missing values are safe by default: when passed to most functions, they either
   propagate or throw an error.

Finally, current limitations and future improvements are discussed.

## A generic representation

One of Julia's strengths is that user-defined types are as powerful and fast as built-in
types. To fully take advantage of this, missing values had to support not only standard
types like `Int`, `Float64` and `String`, but also any custom type. For this reason,
Julia cannot use the so-called *sentinel* approach like R and Pandas to represent
missingness, that is reserving special values within a type's domain. For example,
R represents missing values in integer and boolean vectors using the smallest
representable 32-bit integer (`-2,147,483,648`), and missing values in floating point
vectors using a specific `NaN` payload (`1954`, which rumour says refers to Ross Ihaka's
year of birth). Pandas only supports missing values in floating point vectors,
and conflates them with `NaN` values.

In order to provide a consistent representation of missing values which can be combined
with any type, Julia 0.7 will use `missing`, an object with no fields which is the only
instance of the the `Missing` singleton type. This is a normal Julia type with a few
peculiarities which are detailed below. Values which can be either of type `T` or missing
can simply be declared as `Union{Missing,T}`. For example, a vector holding either integers
or missing values is of type `Array{Union{Missing,Int},1}`:

    julia> [1, missing]
    2-element Array{Union{Missing, Int64},1}:
    1
    missing

An interesting property of this approach is that `Array{Union{Missing,T}}` behaves just
like a normal `Array{T}` as soon as missing values have been replaced or skipped
(see below).

As can be seen in the example above, promotion rules are defined so that concatenating
values of type `T` and missing values gives an array with element type `Union{Missing,T}`
rather than `Any`:

    julia> promote_type(Int, Missing)
    Union{Missing, Int64}

These promotion rules are essential for performance, as we will now see.

## An efficient representation

Another of Julia's strengths is that one does not need to use tricks such as vectorized
calls to make code fast. In this spirit, working with missing values had to be
efficient without requiring special treatment. While the `Union{Missing,T}` approach
would have been very inefficient in previous Julia versions, the situation has
dramatically changed thanks to two improvements implemented in the compiler in
Julia 0.7.

The first improvement involves optimizations for small `Union` types.
When type inference detects that a variable can hold values of multiple types but
that these types are in limited number (as is the case for `Union{Missing,T}`),
the compiler will generate optimized code for each possible type in separate branches,
and run the appropriate one after checking the actual type of the value[^splitting].
This produces code which is very close to that typically used with the sentinel
approach, in which one needs to check manually whether the processed value is equal
to the sentinel. This optimization is of course only available when the type is
inferred as a small `Union`: it is therefore essential to work with
`Array{Union{Missing,T}}` rather than `Array{Any}` objects, to provide the compiler
with the necessary type information.

[^splitting]: This optimization applies to all `Union`s of a small number of types,
whether they are bits types or not. "Small" is defined by the `MAX_UNION_SPLITTING`
constant, which is currently set to 4.

The second one consists in using a compact memory layout for arrays with `Union`s
of bits types. The standard `Array` type now uses an optimized memory layout for
element types which are `Union` of bits types, i.e. immutable types which contain
no references (see `isbits`). This includes `Missing` and basic types such as
`Int`, `Float64`, `Complex{Float64}` and `Date`. When `T` is a bits type,
`Array{Union{Missing,T}}` objects are internally represented as a pair of arrays
of the same size: an `Array{T}` holding non-missing values and uninitialized memory
for missing values; and an `Array{UInt8}` storing a *type tag* indicating whether
each entry is `Missing` or `T`.

This layout consumes slightly more memory than the sentinel approach, as the
type tag part occupies one byte for each entry. But this overhead is reasonable:
for example, the memory usage of an `Array{Union{Missing,Float64}}` is only
12.5% higher than that of an `Array{Float64}`. Compared with the sentinel approach,
it has the advantage of being fully generic (as detailed in the previous section).
Actually, this mechanism can be used in other situations, for example with `Union{Nothing,Int}`
(which is the element type of the array returned by `indexin` in Julia 0.7).
It is also more correct, as the sentinel approach can fail in corner cases: for example,
in R, `NA + NaN` returns `NA` but `NaN + NA` returns `NaN` due to floating point
computation rules.

Arrays of non-bits types with missing values are already represented as efficiently
as their counterparts without missing values. Indeed, such arrays consist of
pointers to the actual objects which live in a different memory area. Missing values
can be represented as a special pointer just like non-missing values. This is notably
the case for `Array{Union{Missing,String}}`.

The efficient memory layout of `Array` in the presence of missing values makes it
unnecessary to use dedicated array types like
[`DataArray`](https://github.com/JuliaStats/DataArrays.jl). In fact, the layout
of the `DataArray` type is very similar to that of `Array{Union{Missing,T}}`
described above. The only difference is that it uses a `BitArray` rather than an
`Array{UInt8}` to indicate whether a value is missing, therefore taking 1 bit per
entry rather than 8 bits. Even if it consumes more memory, the `Array{UInt8}` mask
approach is faster (at least in the current state of `BitArray`), and it generalizes
to `Union`s of more than two types. However, we are aware that other implementations
such as [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.5/static/storage-page-layout.html)
or [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/memory_layout.html#null-bitmaps)
use bitmaps equivalent to `BitArray`.

## Safety and propagation by default

In addition to being generic and efficient, the new missing values support in
Julia 0.7 aims to provide safety, in the sense that missing values should never
be silently ignored nor replaced with non-missing values. Missing values are a
delicate issue in statistical work, and a frequent source of bugs or invalid results.
Ignoring missing values amounts to performing data imputation, which should never
happen silently without an explicit request. This is unfortunately the case in some
major statistical languages: for example, in SAS and Stata, `x < 100` will silently
return `true` or `false` even if `x` is missing[^lt]. This behavior is known to
have caused incorrect results in published scientific work[^35h].

[^lt]: More precisely, SAS considers missing values as smaller than any non-missing
value, and Stata considers them as greater than all non-missing values. This behavior
can be explained by the particular choice of sentinel values of each of these languages
and by an imperfect abstraction revealing implementation details.

[^35h]: See for example Olivier Godechot's
["Can We Use Alsace-Moselle for Estimating the Employment Effects of the 35-Hour
Workweek Regulation in France?"](
http://olivier.godechot.free.fr/hopfichiers/fichierspub/Comment_on_Chemin_Wasmer_2009_Jole.pdf).

Therefore, passing `missing` to a function will always return `missing` or throw
an error (except for a few special functions presented below). For convenience,
standard operators and mathematical functions systematically propagate missing
values:

    julia> 1 + missing
    missing

    julia> missing^2
    missing

    julia> cos(missing)
    missing

    julia> round(missing)
    missing

    julia> "a" * missing
    missing

Reduction operations inherit the propagating behavior of basic operators:

    julia> sum([1, missing, 2])
    missing

    julia> mean([1, missing, 2])
    missing

On the other hand, indexing into a `Vector` with missing values is an error.
Missing values are *not* silently skipped, which would be equivalent to assuming
that they are `false`.

    julia> x = 1:3
    1:3

    julia> x[[true, missing, false]]
    ERROR: ArgumentError: unable to check bounds for indices of type Missing

    julia> x[[1, missing]]
    ERROR: ArgumentError: unable to check bounds for indices of type Missing

Convenience functions are provided to get rid of missing values explicitly.
First, the `skipmissing` function returns an iterator over the non-missing values
in the passed collection. It is particularly useful to ignore missing values when
computing reductions. Call `collect` to obtain a vector with all non-missing values.

    julia> sum(skipmissing([1, missing, 2]))
    3

    julia> mean(skipmissing([1, missing, 2]))
    1.5

    julia> collect(skipmissing([1, missing, 2]))
    2-element Array{Int64,1}:
    1
    2

Second, the `coalesce` function returns the first non-missing argument (as in SQL),
which as a special case allows replacing missing values with a particular value.
Combined with the "dot" broadcasting syntax, it allows replacing all missing
values in an array:

    julia> coalesce(missing, 0)
    0

    julia> coalesce(missing, missing, 0)
    0

    julia> coalesce.([1, missing, 2], 0)
    3-element Array{Int64,1}:
    1
    0
    2

    julia> coalesce.([1, missing, 2], [2, 3, missing])
    3-element Array{Int64,1}:
    1
    3
    2

A restricted set of functions and operators follow different semantics than
those described above. They can be grouped into three classes:

- `ismissing` returns `true` if the input is `missing`, and `false` otherwise.

- `===`, `isequal` and `isless` always return a Boolean. `===` and `isequal` return
  `true` when comparing `missing` to `missing`, and `false` otherwise.
  `isless` also belongs to this class, and returns `true` when
  comparing any non-missing value to `missing`, and `false` otherwise: missing values
  are sorted last.

- `&`, `|` and `⊻`/`xor` implement [three-valued logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-valued_logic),
  returning either a Boolean value or `missing` depending on whether the result is
  fully determined even without knowing what could be the value behind `missing`.

- `==`, `<`, `>`, `<=` and `>=` return `missing` if one of the operands is `missing`
  just like any other operators. When called on collections containing missing values,
  these operators are applied recursively and also follow three-valued logic: they
  return `missing` if the result would depend on what value a `missing` element would take.
  This also applies to `all`, `any` and `in`.

Short-circuiting operators `&&` and `||`, just like `if` conditions, throw an error
if they need to evaluate a missing value.

See the [manual](https://docs.julialang.org/en/latest/manual/missing/) for more details
and illustrations about these rules. Let us note that they are generally consistent with
those implemented by SQL's `NULL` and R's `NA`.

## Current limitations and future developments

As illustrated above, the new `missing` representation satisfies most requirements for a
technical and scientific language like Julia. However, it suffers from some limitations,
some temporary and some more fundamental.

One area which could be improved easily concerns convenience syntax and functions
to deal with missing values. We are fully aware that `Union{Missing,T}` is quite verbose
for those working with missing values in daily work. The `T?` syntax has been discussed
as a compact alternative, inspired by languages with `Nullable` types. However it is
not clear yet whether it would be more appropriate to attribute this syntax to
`Union{Missing,T}` or to `Union{Nothing,T}`. It is therefore currently reserved waiting
for a decision. A possible solution would be to introduce one dedicated syntax for each
of these types.

Convenience functions would also be useful to propagate missing values with functions
which have not been written to do it automatically. Constructs like `lift(f, x)`,
`lift(f)(x)` and `f?(x)` have been
[discussed](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/operations-on-missing-values/9785)
to provide a shorter equivalent of `ismissing(x) ? missing : f(x)`.

Other temporary limitations concern compiler optimizations which are not yet implemented.
First, code involving missing values is [not yet](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/23338)
as efficient as it could be. Second, conversion between `Array{T}` and
`Array{Union{Missing,T}}` currently involves a copy. In theory it should be possible
to use the same memory for bits types, since only the type tag array differs.
Third, the Julia compiler is [currently unable](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/23336)
to generate code using [SIMD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SIMD) instructions when `missing`
values are involved. This is not insurmountable since masked SIMD instructions allow applying
an operation only to some values (the non-missing ones). While the absence of SIMD reduces
noticeably the performance of many operations, it appears that Julia already achieves
the same speed as vectorized operations in R (which are implemented in C). So there is
room for improvement, but the current situation is already reasonably efficient.

A more fundamental limitation is inherent to the choice of the `Union{Missing,T}`
representation. In this representation, a non-missing value does not carry any information
about whether it could have been missing, i.e. about whether it has been extracted from an
array or from a column of a data set which allows for missing values. In practice, this means
that, if `x` is an `Array{Union{Missing,T}}` but does not actually contain missing values,
`map(identity, x)` will return an `Array{T}`. This is because `map` chooses its return type
based only on the actual contents of the output, to avoid depending on type inference
(which can vary depending on compiler improvements). This also means that when applying
a function to each element in an `Array{Union{T,Missing}}`, one cannot choose the result
type based on the type of the first element, which can be problematic e.g. to decide
whether a table column should allow for `NULL` entries in a SQL database. This issue has
been discussed [at length](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/missing-data-and-namedtuple-compatibility/8136/)
in several occasions, but it is not clear yet which mitigating approach is the best one.

Despite these limitations, we believe that missing values support in Julia 0.7 will be one
of the most complete even among specialized statistical languages.

**Author**: [Milan Bouchet-Valat](http://bouchet-valat.site.ined.fr), Research scientist,
French National Institute for Demographic Studies (Ined), Paris.

**Acknowledgements**: This framework is the result of collective efforts over several
years. John Myles White lead the reflection around missing values support in Julia
until 2016. Jameson Nash implemented compiler optimizations, and Jacob Quinn
implemented the efficient memory layout for arrays. Alex Arslan, Jeff Bezanson,
Stefan Karpinski, Jameson Nash and Jacob Quinn have been the most central
participants in long and complex design discussions which have involved many other
developers.